SECOND SEMESTER 2023-2024 Course Handout Part-II Date: 09-01-2024 In
addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the
timetable), this portion gives further specific details regarding the
course.

Course No. : HSS F340 Course Title : Postcolonial Literature
Instructor-in-Charge : Prof T Vijay Kumar

Scope and Objective of the Course: This course, introductory in nature,
seeks to help students make sense of their postcolonial context through
a study of its representation in literary and theoretical texts. The
course will familiarize them with the key terms, concepts, issues,
debates, and theories in postcolonial writing. Students will be
encouraged to reflect on and revisit received notions and canonical
texts from the perspective of their lived experience. Besides equipping
them with the conceptual framework and analytical tools to read the
'signs' in colonial, postcolonial, and nationalist discourses, the
course aims to foster, through lectures, debate, discussion, and
assignments, self-reflection and the spirit of critical inquiry among
students.

Textbooks:  1. McLeod, John. Beginning Postcolonialism. 2nd ed.,
Manchester UP, 2010. 2. Ashcroft, Bill, et al., editors. Post-Colonial
Studies: The Key Concepts. 2nd ed., Routledge, 2007.

Reference books  1. Ashcroft, Bill, et al., editors. The Empire Writes
Back: Theory and Practice in Post-Colonial Literatures. 2nd ed.,
Routledge, 2002. New Accents Series. 2. Gandhi, Leela. Postcolonial
Theory: A Critical Introduction. 2nd ed., Columbia University Press,
2019. 3. Loomba, Ania. Colonialism/Postcolonialism. Routledge, 2016. The
New Critical Idiom Series. 4. Nandy, Ashis. The Intimate Enemy: Loss and
Recovery of Self Under Colonialism. 2nd ed., OUP, 2009. 5. Young, Robert
JC. Postcolonialism: A Very Short Introduction. OUP, 2003. Very Short
Introductions Series.

NOTE: Text and reference books listed above will be supplemented, if and
when needed, with other resources in the classroom. Students are
expected to be familiar with the additional reading material as well.

Course Plan:

Lecture No. Learning objectives Topics to be covered Chapter in the Text
Book 1-5 Unit I Introduction to the prehistory of postcolonialism Course
overview; From Commonwealth to postcolonial; Meaning/s of the term
'postcolonial' TB 1--- Introduction, Ch-1 6-16 Unit II Introduction to
key terms, concepts, issues, and debates Colony, Colonialism,
Imperialism; Eurocentrism, Universalism; Race, Ethnicity;
Neocolonialism, Decolonization; Nation, Nationalism, Diaspora;
Subalternity, Counter discourse; Mimicry, Hybridity TB-2 17

Recap of Units I & II

18-28 Unit III Introduction to major theories, theorists, and
theoretical texts TB Macaulay, "Minute on Education"; MK Gandhi, Hind
Swaraj or Indian Home Rule; Edward Said, "Introduction" (Orientalism);
Rudyard Kipling, "The White Man's Burden"; George Orwell, "Shooting an
Elephant" The Texts 29

Recap of Unit III

30-40 Unit IV Introduction to some seminal literary texts William
Shakespeare, The Tempest; Raja Rao, "Foreword" (Kanthapura); Chinua
Achebe, Things Fall Apart, RK Narayan, TheÂ Man-Eater of Malgudi The
Texts

Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration Weight (%) Date & Time Nature of Component
Assignments 1 & 2 TBA 20 & 15 TBA Open Book & Closed Book Mid-semester
Test 90 Minutes 30 15/03 - 4.00 - 5.30PM Closed Book Comprehensive
Examination 3 hours 35 17/05 AN Closed Book

Chamber Consultation Hour: In K-128; Thursday---11:30-12:30. Notices: If
any, will be posted on CMS. Make-up Policy: Assignments will not be
repeated. Make-up for other assessment components will be allowed only
in genuine cases and based on verifiable, documentary proof. Academic
Honesty and Integrity Policy: Academic honesty and integrity are to be
maintained by all the students throughout the semester and no type of
academic dishonesty is acceptable.

T Vijay Kumar INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE
