SECOND SEMESTER 2023-2024 Course Handout Part II Date: 09/01/2024 In
addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the
timetable) this portion gives further specific details regarding the
course.

Course No. : HSS F338 Course Title : Comparative Indian Literature
Instructor-in-charge : M.G. Prasuna

Scope and objective of the course: This course aims to acquaint
technical students with literary achievements in Indian Languages and to
give an integrated view of Indian Literature from a comparative
perspective. The main objective is to make students understand how the
literature of various Indian languages evolved over a period of time
under the influence of social, political, religious and economic
progress that the land has experienced through the passage of time. The
selected pieces of literature would reflect the ethos of the land of its
origin and the people who speak it. Students will be required to closely
read and analyze texts not only in terms of genre and style, but also in
terms of the historical and political contexts in which these texts
were/are (re)produced. It makes learners aware of the varied range of
Indian literature, and the many themes and styles, reflecting the vast
differences in linguistic, regional and historical context.

The main objectives of the course are to enable learners to: ● develop
an understanding of the literary achievements in Indian Languages; ●
recognize the socio, political and religious aspects reflected in Indian
literature; ● develop critical reading skills; ● examine literary texts
from a comparative perspective;

Text books:

1\. Jancy James, Chandra Mohan, Subha Chakraborty Dasgupta, Nirmal Kanti
Bhattacharjee, Edited. Studies in Comparative Literature Theory, Culture
and Space, Creative Books, New Delhi,2007.

2\. Arvind Krishna Mehrotra. Edited. An Illustrated History of Indian
Literature in English. Orient Black Swan. 2014. Reference Books:

1\. Ben Hutchinson.Comparative Literature: A Very Short Introduction.
OUP, 2018. 2. Steven Totosy de Zepetnek, Tutun Mukherjee. Comparative
Literature, World Literatures and Comparative Cultural Studies.
Foundation Books, New Delhi. 2013. 3. Andrew Schelling.ed. The Oxford
Anthology of Bhakti Literature. Oxford University Press.2011. NOTE: Text
and reference books listed above will be supplemented, if and when
needed, with other resources in the classroom.

Course Plan:

Lecture No.

Learning objectives

Topics to be covered Chapter in the Text Book

1-4 Understand and reflect upon the concepts of World Literature and
Comparative Literature Meaning, Definition and scope of Comparative
Literature. Theory, History.

Comparative literature, World Literatures and Comparative Cultural
studies (part 1) 5-10 Examine the concept of Comparative Indian
Literature.

Comparative Indian Literature -- Past and Present. Concepts and
Practices. Methodology.

Comparative literature, World Literatures and Comparative Cultural
studies (part 2) 11-14 Explore comparative methodology of reading --
Narratives.

Select narratives from Indian traditions. Bhakti Movement in Indian
Literature. Concept of Bhakti and a brief survey of Bhakti Literature.
Studies in Comparative Literature Theory, Culture and Space (Chapters
8-13) 15-20 Apply methods of a comparative Literary study --
Theoretical, formal and interpretive issues

Genres, forms, periods, movements and influence studies. Themes and
Myths, literature in translation. Areas of study in a Comparative
framework: thematology, genology, Historiography, reception and
influence, intertextuality; interliterariness, and interdisciplinarity
Studies in Comparative Literature Theory, Culture and Space (chapters
1-7) 21-25 Examine the history of Indian English Literature Major
contributors to Indian English Literature. Literary Movements and Genres
Indian fiction in historical and social context A Concise History of
Indian Literature in English (chapter 1) 26-33 Critically evaluate
Partition Literature An analysis of select partition writings.
Historical and political background of partition. Cultural memories and
representation of partition in literature. The Pity of Partition.
(chapter 3) 34 -42 Compare and reflect on literature across linguistic
and social boundaries. Indian Diasporic writing. Critical interpretation
of selected works. Studies in Comparative Literature Theory, Culture and
Space (chapters 14-18)

Evaluation Scheme: Component Duration Weightage (%) Date & Time Nature
of Component Assignments Will be announced in the class 30 Will be
announced in the class Open book Mid Semester Examination 90 minutes 30
14/03 - 2.00 - 3.30PM Closed Book Comprehensive Exam 120 minutes 40
15/05 FN Closed Book

Chamber Consultation hours: Will be announced in the class. Notices:
Notices, if any, will be displayed on CMS. Make-up Policy: Make-up
requests will be considered only if it is genuine and if the student's
request for make-up reaches the undersigned within two hours after the
scheduled time of test. Academic Honesty and Integrity Policy: Academic
honesty and integrity are to be maintained by all the students
throughout the semester and no type of academic dishonesty is
acceptable.

M. G. Prasuna INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE
