**BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE PILANI,**

**HYDERABAD CAMPUS**

**2016-2017 SECOND SEMESTER**

**BIOPHYSICS (BIO F215)**

**Comprehensive exam (CLOSED BOOK)**

**WEIGHTAGE (16%)**

**Total time: one hour fifteen minutes**

**MAXIMUM MARKS: 32 DATE: 15.05.2017**

Q1a. Why is a fluorescence spectrum independent of the excitation
wavelength? **3M**

Q1b. Assuming that fluorescence decay is a first-order process, show the
relationship between fluorescence lifetime and quantum yield. Explain
all the terms involved in it. **3M**

Q2. Explain the major driving force(s) in a) protein folding and b)
bilayer formation? Explain the folding processes in the light of the
major driving force, in each case. **4M**

Q3. Based on the principle of constructive interference and Bragg's law,

a)  Show that the diffraction angles for one-dimensional X-ray
    diffraction is quantized for integer values (0, 1, 2...).

b)  Write an equation similar to Bragg's law for three dimensional X-ray
    diffraction pattern, mentioning all the integers. **6M**

Q4. A protein undergoes a subtle conformational change. The most
significant motion was the change in relative position of three closely
packed amino acid side chains (leucine, alanine and phenylalanine ) from
the ethanol like protein interior (A form) to the solvent exposed region
(B form). Consider this as the only thermodynamically significant event.
Use the information given in the table below.

a)  Calculate the equilibrium constant for the change from B form to A
    from at 25º C. Use the data given below.

b)  Based on the calculated equilibrium constant, predict which form is
    more stable. **6M**

Table: Free energy changes for transferring various amino acids from
ethanol to water at 25º C.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Amino acid                          ΔG (kcal/mol)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Glycine                             0

  Alanine                             +0.73

  Leucine                             +2.42

  Phenylalanine                       +2.65
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Q5. A particular NMR instrument operates at 30.256 MHz.

a)  What magnetic field is required by a ^1^H nucleus to resonate at
    this frequency? Mention the frequency in Testla. Useful constants: h
    = 6.626 x 10^-34^ Js; β~N~ = 5.051 x 10^-27^ JT^-1,^ g = 5.585.
    Consider, (g β~N~ /h) constitute the gyromagnetic ratio. The
    constant β~N~ includes (1/2π) term. Show the calculation.

b)  Explain whether the same gyromagnetic ratio can be used to calculate
    the resonance frequency of ^13^C nucleus. **6M**

Q6. A closed circular DNA has 9090 base pairs. In normal aqueous
solution, this circular DNA assumes B helix. Compute the number and type
of supercoils expected when the B-DNA is converted into the A-DNA by
addition of alcohol. **4M**
