BIRLA INSITUTE of TECHNOLOGY and SCIENCE, Hyderabad Campus

Biophysics (BioF215)

Comprehensive exam

9^th^ May 2022 duration 3 hours (25% CB and 15% OB) **Total (CB+OB) 80
MARKS**

**Closed book (50 Marks)**

One can submit the closed book answer paper any time within the three
hours. Once closed book is submitted, question paper for open book will
be provided

1.  A\) Solutions containing the amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine can
    be analysed under alkaline conditions (0.1M KOH) from their
    different UV spectra. The molar extinction coefficients under these
    conditions at 240nm and 280 nm are

ε~Tyr~^240^ = 11300 M^-1^cm^-1^, ε~Tyr~^280^ = 1500 M^-1^cm^-1^,
ε~Trp~^240^ = 1960 M^-1^cm^-1^, ε~Trp~^280^ = 5380 M^-1^cm^-1^

A 10-mg sample of the protein glucagon is hydrolysed to its constituent
amino acids and diluted to 100ml KOH. The absorbance of this solution
(1-cm path length) is 0.717 at 240 nm and 0.239 at 280nm. Estimate the
content of tryptophan and tyrosine in μmol. **4M**

B\) Based on the structures of Tyrosine, Tryptophan and Phenylalanine,
explain why these amino acids are sensitive to absorption spectroscopy
at specific wavelengths. **2M**

C\) Comment on their relative intensities of absorption peaks. **2M**

2.  A\) Explain the difference between fluorescence and phosphorescence.
    **3M**

B\) Why is a fluorescence spectra independent of the wavelength of
excitation **3M**

C)  Justify the following statements -- **4M**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
i)  Energy minimization is sufficient to describe the dynamic behaviour
    of biomolecules.

ii) Energy Minimization and Molecular Dynamics simulations both require
    velocities to compute energy.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
3.  A\) 3-D structure of a protein was determined using X-ray
    crystallography. The reported R-factor corresponding to this crystal
    structure was 16%. Comment on the quality of the crystal.

B\) Explain why Cu-Kα wavelength is most widely used in protein
crystallography? **6M**

4.  A\) N-terminal of an alpha helix interacts with the phosphate group
    of an DNA. Name the most significant interaction involved in this
    process of recognition, with proper justification. Name the next
    significant competitive interaction, with proper justification.
    **4M**

5.  Suppose that a protein composed of a single polypeptide chain and a
    single subunit is found by x-ray diffraction to possess nearly
    perfect C2 symmetry. What can you conclude about the primary
    structure? About the location of N- and C- termini within the
    tertiary structure? **6M**

6.  Consider a single strand of DNA with exactly the same primary
    structure as yeast tRNA. In what ways do you expect the tertiary
    structure formed by this DNA to differ from that of tRNA? **6M**

7.  Rhodopsin is extracted from rod outer segments of retinas with
    dodecyldimethylamine oxide (DDAO), a non-ionie detergent. The
    rhodopsin-DDAO complex is characterized by binding experiments, gel
    filtration, sedimentation, densimetry; its homogeneity, chemical
    composition, weight and partial specific volume are determined. The
    complex turns out to be a reasonably monodisperse association of one
    rhodopsin and 156 DDAO molecules. The rhodopsin-DDAO complex and the
    detergent micelles are studied by small-angle X-ray scattering
    techniques using a water/sucrose solvent of variable density. The
    experiments are performed on an absolute scale; mainly the value and
    curvature of the scattering curves at zero angle are exploited. The
    structure of the complex and of the micelles is shown to be
    independent of sucrose.  It was shown in the study that the centres
    of gravity of rhodopsin and of the detergent moiety are very near to
    each other.

Given the fact that rhodopsin contains seven trans-membrane helices and
considering the above information, comment whether any structural
changes is expected in the structure of rhodopsin. Predict how the
rhodopsin protein will align on flat detergent micelle. **6M**
